We have provided below a 200-word short essay on democracy in India for school and college test, homework, project work, case study and assignment for students. The short essay on democracy is suitable for students of classes 1,2,3,4,5,and 6.

To quote Winston Churchill, the late Prime Minister of UK during the 1940s “Democracy is the worst form of governance, except for all others”. This statement reflects the thought that there is no alternative to democracy. It can be considered as a necessary evil for the human race. Democracy is a form of governance that allows even the poorest of the poor and the underprivileged of a country to become the leader of the same country. It is the perfect and fitting answer for hierarchical, nepotism and authoritarian form of governance where the leaders are appointed on the basis of a bloodline. In a democracy, leaders are not appointed but elected through majoritarianism and the love and support of the people. Some of the most successful democracies are also the most developed ones, such as India, USA, Germany, UK, NewZealand or Australia in contrast with authoritarian counties that are relatively struggling to develop and progress, such as North Korea, Libya, Egypt, etc.

The legislature, executive, judiciary and the media are the four fundamental pillars of democracy on which the country stands. Impairment in any one of the pillars will directly or indirectly affect the other three. These pillars are the self-appointed gladiators and guardians of the core values of democracy which are life, liberty, equality, fraternity, rule of law, diversity, sovereignty and patriotism.

10 Lines on Democracy in India Essay
The common man is the real kingmaker in a democracy
Executive, legislature and judiciary are the three pillars of democracy while media is considered as the fourth pillar
A free and fair election is a basic step and necessity in a democratic system
The public elects their representatives, who ideally should be the voice and eyes of the common man
Fraternity, equality, liberty and rule of law are some of the fundamental core values of a democratic system of governance
Athens, in Greece, is the oldest functioning form of democratic governance in the world
Democratic systems, ideally, are meant to be governed with policies and laws that favour the common citizen of the country
Authoritarianism, dictatorship and fascism are some of the unpopular alternatives for the democratic system of governance
Parliamentary, presidential and mixed are the three types of democracies that exist in the world
Democracy and republic are the two forms where the true power lies with the common citizens of the country